When Mr. Name Name of Bag End announced that he
would shortly be celebrating his eleventy-first birthday with
a party of special magnificence, there was much talk and
excitement in Town.
Name was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the
wonder of the City for sixty years, ever since his remarkable
disappearance and unexpected return. The riches he had
brought back from his travels had now become a local legend,
and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk might
say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with
treasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was also
his prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it
seemed to have little effect on Mr. Name. At ninety he was
much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they began to call
him well-preserved; but unchanged would have been nearer the
mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought
this was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair that
anyone should possess (apparently) perpetual youth as well
as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.
‘It will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and
trouble will come of it!’
But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Name was
generous with his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good fortune. He remained
on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of course, the
Sackville-Namees), and he had many devoted admirers
among the persons of poor and unimportant families. But he
had no close friends, until some of his younger cousins began
to grow up.
28 the fellowship of the ring
The eldest of these, and Name’s favourite, was young Name
Name. When Name was ninety-nine he adopted Name as
his heir, and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes of
the Sackville-Namees were finally dashed. Name and Name
happened to have the same birthday, September 22nd. ‘You
had better come and live here, Name my lad,’ said Name
one day; ‘and then we can celebrate our birthday-parties
comfortably together.’ At that time Name was still in his
tweens, as the persons called the irresponsible twenties
between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.
Twelve more years passed. Each year the Namees had
given very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but
now it was understood that something quite exceptional
was being planned for that autumn. Name was going to be
eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number, and a very respectable age for a person (the Old Took himself had only
reached 130); and Name was going to be thirty-three, 33, an
important number: the date of his ‘coming of age’.
Tongues began to wag in Town and Bywater; and
rumour of the coming event travelled all over the City. The
history and character of Mr. Name Name became once
again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folk
suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.
No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham
Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. He held forth at
The Ivy Bush, a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke
with some authority, for he had tended the garden at Bag
End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same
job before that. Now that he was himself growing old and
stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on very
friendly terms with Name and Name. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Name Row just below Bag End.
‘A very nice well-spoken gentleperson is Mr. Name, as I’ve
always said,’ the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Name
was very polite to him, calling him ‘Master Name’, and
a long-expected party 29
consulting him constantly upon the growing of vegetables –
in the matter of ‘roots’, especially potatoes, the Gaffer was
recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood (including himself ).
‘But what about this Name that lives with him?’ asked Old
Noakes of Bywater. ‘Name is his name, but he’s more than
half a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Name
of Town should go looking for a wife away there in
Buckland, where folks are so queer.’
‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot
(the Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they live on the wrong
side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest.
That’s a dark bad place, if half the tales be true.’
‘You’re right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. 
‘Well, so they say,’ said the Gaffer. ‘You see: Mr. Drogo,
he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was our Mr.
Name’s first cousin on the mother’s side; and Mr. Drogo
was his second cousin. So Mr. Name is his first and second
cousin, once removed either way, as the saying is, if you
follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with
his father-in-law, as he often did
after his marriage; and he went out
boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were
drownded, and poor Mr. Name only a child and all.’
‘I’ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the
moonlight,’ said Old Noakes; ‘and it was Drogo’s weight as
sunk the boat.’
‘And I heard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after
him,’ said Sandyman, the Town miller.
‘You shouldn’t listen to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the
Gaffer, who did not much like the miller. ‘There isn’t no call
to go talking of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite tricky
enough for those that sit still without looking further for the
cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Name left an
orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer
Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A
regular warren, by all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never
had fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place.
Mr. Name never did a kinder deed than when he brought the
lad back to live among decent folk.
‘But I reckon it was a nasty knock for those SackvilleNamees. They thought they were going to get Bag End,
that time when he went off and was thought to be dead. And
then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes on
living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him!
And suddenly he produces an heir, and has all the papers
made out proper. The Sackville-Namees won’t never see
the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’
‘There’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear
tell,’ said a stranger, a visitor on business from Michel
Delving in the Westfarthing. ‘All the top of your hill is full of
tunnels packed with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by
what I’ve heard.’
‘Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered
the Gaffer. ‘I know nothing about jools. Mr. Name is free with
his money, and there seems no lack of it; but I know of no
tunnel-making. I saw Mr. Name when he came back, a matter
of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I’d not long come
prentice to old Holman (him being my dad’s cousin), but he
had me up at Bag End helping him to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was
on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Name comes up the Hill
with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests.
I don’t doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked
up in foreign parts, where there be mountains of gold, they
say; but there wasn’t enough to fill tunnels. But my lad Name
will know more about that. He’s in and out of Bag End.
Crazy about stories of the old days, he is, and he listens to
all Mr. Name’s tales. Mr. Name has learned him his letters –
meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will come
of it.
‘Elves and Dragons! I said to him. Cabbages and potatoes are
better for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business
of your betters, or you’ll land in trouble too big for you, I says to
him. And I might say it to others,’ he added with a look at
the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend
of Name’s wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of
the younger generation of persons.
‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he
brought at first,’ argued the miller, voicing common opinion.
‘He’s often away from home. And look at the outlandish folk
that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and that old wandering
conjuror, Name, and all. You can say what you like, Gaffer,
but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.’
‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no
more of than you do of boating, Mr. Name,’ retorted
the Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’s
being queer, then we could do with a bit more queerness in
these parts. There’s some not far away that wouldn’t offer a
pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden
walls. But they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says
that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there’s
going to be presents, mark you, presents for all – this very
month as is.’
That very month was September, and as fine as you could
ask. A day or two later a rumour (probably started by the
knowledgeable Sam) was spread about that there were going
to be fireworks – fireworks, what is more, such as had not
been seen in the City for nigh on a century, not indeed since
the Old Man died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking
waggon laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Town one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The
startled persons peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. It
was driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves
with long beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained
at Bag End. At the end of the second week in September a
cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all
alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and
a silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows
that stuck out beyond the brim of his hat. Small personchildren ran after the cart all through Town and right up
the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly guessed.
At Name’s front door the old man began to unload: there
were great bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each
labelled with a large red G and the elf-rune, .
That was Name’s mark, of course, and the old man
was Name the Wizard, whose fame in the City was due
mainly to his skill with fires, smokes, and lights. His real
business was far more difficult and dangerous, but the
City-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one
of the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement of
the person-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the
old man smiled. They knew him by sight, though he only
appeared in Town occasionally and never stopped long;
but neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had
seen one of his firework displays – they now belonged to a
legendary past.
When the old man, helped by Name and some dwarves,
had finished unloading, Name gave a few pennies away; but
a long-expected party 33
not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.
‘Run away now!’ said Name. ‘You will get plenty when
the time comes.’ Then he disappeared inside with Name, and
the door was shut. The young persons stared at the door in
vain for a while, and then made off, feeling that the day of
the party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Name and Name were sitting at the open
window of a small room looking out west on to the garden.
The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The flowers
glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and sunflowers, and
nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in at
the round windows.
‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Name.
‘Yes,’ said Name. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all
the dear old City; but I think I need a holiday.’
‘You mean to go on with your plan then?’
‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t
changed it.’
‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your
plan – your whole plan, mind – and I hope it will turn out
for the best, for you, and for all of us.’
‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday,
and have my little joke.’
‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Name, shaking his head.
‘We shall see,’ said Name.
The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more
carts. There might have been some grumbling about ‘dealing
locally’, but that very week orders began to pour out of Bag
End for every kind of provision, commodity, or luxury that
could be obtained in Town or Village or anywhere in
the neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they
began to tick off the days on the calendar; and they watched
eagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations.
Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the
Town post-office was blocked, and the Other postoffice was snowed under, and voluntary assistant postmen
were called for. There was a constant stream of them going
up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank
you, I shall certainly come.
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: no admittance except on party business. Even those who had,
or pretended to have Party Business were seldom allowed
inside. Name was busy: writing invitations, ticking off
answers, packing up presents, and making some private
preparations of his own. From the time of Name’s arrival
he remained hidden from view.
One morning the persons woke to find the large field, south
of Name’s front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents
and pavilions. A special entrance was cut into the bank
leading to the road, and wide steps and a large white gate
were built there. The three person-families of Bagshot Row,
adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally
envied. The Old Gaffer stopped even pretending to work
in his garden. The tents began to go up. There was a specially large
pavilion, so big that the tree that grew in the field was right
inside it, and stood proudly near one end, at the head of
the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its branches.
More promising still (to the persons’ mind): an enormous
open-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the field.
A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for
miles around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other
odd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to
its height. Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday
the eve of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday,
September the 22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the
clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun began.
Name Name called it a party, but it was really a variety
of entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living
near was invited.